16
GAME MECHANICS,
EXPERIENCE DESIGN,
AND AFFECTIVE
PLAY
Patrick Jagoda and Peter McDonald
This chapter explores games as a major object of study in both media theory and practice.
We begin by identifying two competing critical approaches to games: the proceduralist (which
emphasizes rules, objectives, and systems) and the play-centric (which emphasizes modes of
player response). By distinction, we advocate for a middle ground, a type of experience design
that foregrounds the ways players can affect and be affected by a game: experientially, kin -
es thetically, and ideologically. The main site for this elaboration of affect is game mechanics.
The chapter draws from close readings of existing digital and analog games, as well as tech -
niques developed through the creative process in the Game Changer Chicago (GCC) Design
Lab, to which we both belong. Ultimately, we offer a sketch of a practice-based research
method for designing learning-oriented and serious games in media studies.
The Procedural and the Playful
Two primary approaches have dominated game studies since the early 2000s, one organized
around procedure and the other around play. In an important study of storytelling in
computational environments, Janet Murray observes that a key attribute of computers is
that they “execute a series of rules” that enable dynamic interactions between the machine
and human actors (1997: 71–72). Storytellers and game designers, Murray contends, can use
algo rithms and rules to convey interpretations. One of the most vocal theorists of pro cedural -
ism, Ian Bogost, defines it as a way of generating and making sense of processes. Processes,
in turn, “define the way things work: the methods, techniques, and logics that drive the
operation of systems, from mechanical systems like engines to organizational systems like
high schools to conceptual systems like religious faith” (Bogost 2007: 3). Videogames are
a medium that uses, and even depends on, what Bogost calls “procedural rhetoric,” which
“explains processes with other processes” in order to persuade users of a particular viewpoint
(9). This procedural approach privileges a game’s rules and its representation of select systems.
For example, the single-player, turn-based videogame PeaceMaker (Impact Games, 2007),
puts the player in the perspective of either the Israeli prime minister or the Palestinian
174
president. PeaceMaker produces a system in which the player’s success hinges on a multifaceted
political ecology. Actions reveal implicit ethical arguments: delivering peaceful speeches or
establishing welfare programs are more consistently rewarded with higher scores than
militaristic responses. Even more explicitly, the game posits a two-state solution as its goal.
PeaceMaker does not produce an expository argument about responses to international grid -
lock (as a blog post might) nor does it craft a psychological perspective on this system (as a
stream-of-consciousness novel might). Instead, the game invites players to experiment with
algorithmic processes to better understand a set of political processes, as modeled by the
designers.
Proceduralism has contributed to the analysis of videogames as cultural objects and
influenced design practices, especially of so-called “serious games” that explicitly address social
and political topics in the interest of participatory advocacy. At the same time, scholars more
interested in processes of play than game structures have emphasized the limitations of
procedural rhetoric as an analytic and design technique. At the forefront of the antipro cedural
approach is Miguel Sicart, who contends that proceduralism is essentially a version of
formalism. A consequence of proceduralism, Sicart argues, is that “it grants great power and
influence to the designer,” who produces the system that the player must, in turn, reverse
engineer sufficiently to unpack the meaning that is inherent in it (2011). For Sicart, the
limitation of proceduralism is that it marginalizes the ways in which people play by stipu -
lating that meaning largely precedes the act of play. In other words, a game’s procedural
rhetoric belongs to its system of rules and objectives, rather than to the ways in which players
test and transform that system. In contrast, play-centric accounts demonstrate that actions and
meanings cannot prefigure play. As Alexander Galloway argues, though machine actions are
key, digital games only “exist when enacted” (2006: 2). This focus on play has found pro -
ponents not only in the humanities, but also among sociology and anthropology scholars who
use qualitative techniques, such as interviews, to study a plurality of player interpretations
(Voorhees 2013).
In videogames, different players may indeed have distinct experiences of action, narrative,
or roleplaying. For example, Kurt Squire argues that open-ended simulation or “sandbox”
games, such as Civilization III and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, operate as “possibility spaces”
in which players can “try on, inhabit, and ultimately develop new identities with trajectories
for participation that extend out of the game world and into new spaces” (2008: 171–2). In
other cases, a game’s artificial intelligence may promote emergent gameplay by adapting
dynamically to a player’s skill and present situation. The “AI Director” of Left 4 Dead works
collaboratively with players to produce dramatic encounters and spawns “Infected” enemies
based on player performance, creating novel play scenarios. Even in games that are not created
explicitly to promote emergent play styles, participants frequently use a system in ways that
were not intended or predicted by the designers. For instance, players may find creative ways
to exploit glitches, such as “rocket jumping” in Quake or Halo, that allow them to achieve
greater elevation by (mis)using a weapon for mobility. In still other cases, games themselves
produce variable experiences from session to session through procedurally generated char -
acters (e.g., creatures in Spore) and levels (e.g., the fantasy world of Dwarf Fortress).
This theoretical rift is roughly parallel to the earlier split in literary criticism between, on
the one hand, Russian Formalism and American New Criticism and, on the other hand,
reader-response theory and deformative criticism that privileged creative interpretation. To
be fair, however, procedural and play-centric theories are not mutually exclusive. Most pro -
ceduralists do, to some extent, account for the role of play in game activities. For example,
Bogost notes:
GAME MECHANICS, DESIGN, AND AFFECTIVE PLAY
175
In a procedural representation like a videogame, the possibility space refers to the
myriad configurations the player might construct to see the ways the processes
inscribed in the system work. This is really what we do when we play videogames:
we explore the possibility space its rules afford by manipulating the game’s controls.
(Bogost 2007: 42)
In this formulation, seemingly inexpressive processes can still enable complex forms of
expression. Even so, Sicart (2014) is right that meaning is, for Bogost, founded in procedures
whereas, for him, procedures are secondary to the possibilities of play.
Experience Design: Rules, Mechanics, and Affect
Sicart goes as far as to argue that “games don’t matter” when compared to the more gen er -
alized processes of play unfolding in toys, playgrounds, technologies, and social groups
(2014: 2). Though we share Sicart’s investment in a broader landscape of play, as game
designers we are also interested in what both procedural and play-centric theories have to
teach us about game creation practices. Given the increasingly practice-based orientation of
digital humanities and new media studies, especially as they are taken up in this volume, we
would like to use these frameworks to think about the design of serious games. One bridge
between procedures and play through design comes from Katie S. Tekinbas¸ and Eric
Zimmerman (2003). As they show, game designers may start by creating a rule-based system
and defining some of its affordances, but the success of a game ultimately depends on ex -
peri ence design that privileges the prospective player. As Tekinbas¸ puts it, a designer becomes
“a socio-technical engineer, thinking about how people will interact with the game and how
the game will shape both competitive and collaborative social interaction” (2007: 305). Instead
of over-determining form, this orientation yields an evocative design created for ambiguous
and open-ended experiences.
The concept of experience design suggests an internal tension insofar as it combines the control
of design with the uncontrollable diversity of player experiences. Thus, design may influence
experience, but only in an indirect way. Even so, rather than limiting playfulness, Tekinbas¸
and Zimmerman argue that rules “create multiple levels of play experience, layering strategic
thinking and gradual skill acquisition on top of the physical and perceptual components of
the core mechanic” (2003: 320). Game mechanics are the set of techniques for interacting
with a game world that are arbitrarily mapped through an interface to player gestures and
are both constrained and enabled by a game’s platform, whether it is a PlayStation 4 console
or an analog game board. These actions, expressed as verbs, might include “jumping” in a
platformer or “targeting” in a first-person shooter. For Tekinbas¸ and Zimmerman, and for
us, a mechanic is a key point of mediation between the player and the game that opens up
the ambiguity of play. A mechanic provides a point of departure from which a variety of
procedural rhetorics can proliferate. On the one hand, a mechanic is a kind of rule, an action
that the game can allow or disallow; on the other, players must take up that act as their own
for the game to proceed.
Mechanics arguably provide the clearest example of how constraint imposed through design
can enable creativity and playfulness instead of limiting players. For example, Super Mario
World opens up pleasurable kinesthetic sensations and bodily identifications by allowing its
players to fly. However, the sense of freedom in flying only emerges against the backdrop
of Mario’s ordinary activities of running and jumping. Reciprocally, because flight requires
a power-up and takes a significant running start, and because its duration depends on a player’s
PATRICK JAGODA AND PETER MCDONALD
176
skill, Mario’s repertoire of jumps accumulates meanings. It might be required to traverse a
level, or it might enable the enjoyment of acrobatic movements. The point we want to
emphasize, contra Sicart and others, is that rules are not essentially prohibitive (as Michel
Foucault already argues of rules in a broader socio-historical context). Instead, they multiply
possible meanings of play by creating new contexts of action.
If the meanings of a game are negotiable, and emerge from the interplay between rules
and experience, between procedure and play, then mechanics may serve to orient both game
analysis and design. While game mechanics may not yield the kind of discursive argumen -
tation of procedural rhetoric, they constitute an ideal unit of analysis for affective experiences.
Though it has many connotations, the term “affect” refers essentially to a “nonconscious
experience of intensity” that differs from either feelings that are personal and narrativizable
or emotions that are visible and communicative (Shouse 2005). As verbs, mechanics help us
think about potentials, transformations, desires, intensities, experimental engagements, and
connections among players. Importantly, while the process of narrating game experiences
often entails describing affects as feelings, mechanics do not merely produce unified results
in which jumping elicits one kind of bodily sense whereas targeting evokes another. Jumping
provokes myriad feelings, including elation, freedom, curiosity, or a sense of precarity, while
targeting produces malice, satisfaction, the sense of appropriative connection to a target, or
a feeling of bodily extension through a world. More than defining feelings, mechanics enable
players to affect the world of the game, and in turn be affected by it, opening up aleatory
experiences. We are using affect here as somewhat synonymous with feeling, but also want
to draw on the legacy of Spinoza for whom the possible activity and passivity of a body
determines its feelings. Gilles Deleuze observes of Spinoza that “we do not even know what
a body can do,” and this is equally true of the gamer’s or the avatar’s body (1983: 36). Funda -
mentally, mechanics can generate proliferating affects and meanings that exceed a one-toone signification.
As we have been discussing them, mechanics mediate between rule-bound situations and
player affects. As Tekinbas¸ and Zimmerman put it:
To play a game is to experience the game: to see, touch, hear, smell, and taste the
game; to move the body during play, to feel emotions about the unfolding outcome,
to communicate with other players, to alter normal patterns of thinking.
(Tekinbas¸ & Zimmerman 2003: 314)
Though “fun” is perhaps the most frequently invoked aspect of game experience, games
generate a wide range of affects. Some of these may serve persuasive purposes, but others
are more ambiguous or aesthetic in nature. Procedural analyses often limit the discussion of
affective experiences, restrict them to oversimplified typologies, or characterize them as
ideological elements. Similarly, discussions of a game’s “interactivity” often privilege agency,
figured as choice that a player does or does not have. However, beyond the binary split implicit
in fun or agential interactivity, players may also experience affects such as anxiety, paranoia,
anticipation, and curiosity in the process of encountering hardware, interfaces, game worlds,
and player cultures.
In the remaining sections, we begin to sketch out the ways that game mechanics might open
up more nuanced forms of analysis and design strategies. To do so, we focus neither on a
priori rules, objectives, and systems (as proceduralists might) nor modes of play (as play-centric
theorists might). Instead, charting a middle path, we explore the meaning of mechanics in
play, first in game analysis and second in game design.
GAME MECHANICS, DESIGN, AND AFFECTIVE PLAY
177
PATRICK JAGODA AND PETER MCDONALD
178
The Case of “Collecting” in Katamari Damacy:
Game Analysis
The three interpretive methods that we are comparing—practices that focus on rules (pro -
ceduralism), play (play-centrism), and mechanics (experience design)—can usefully be
juxtaposed by showing how they operate in the analysis of a single game. The mechanic of
“collecting” in the innovative videogame, Katamari Damacy (Namco 2004; see Figure 16.1),
serves as a clarifying case. In this game, players use two analog sticks to control “The Prince,”
an alien avatar who rolls around a sticky ball that collects everything in its path. This “katamari”
ball grows from an initial size of 5 cm (at which point it collects tacks and ants) to an eventual
size of over 300 meters (at which point the katamari can collect cars and buildings). In each
level, the katamari must reach a certain size within a time limit. In addition to the assorted
mass, players collect special objects that form larger collections such as cousins of the Prince
and uniquely named versions of ordinary objects. New media scholars McKenzie Wark
(2007) and Steven Jones (2008) offer readings of the game that privilege procedure and
play, respectively. In contrast, we offer a third reading that describes a range of affects that
the game activates through collecting.
Wark’s Gamer Theory (2007) articulates a strong version of the proceduralist thesis. For
Wark, it is because a world framed by late capitalism has adopted the structure of games that
this medium can help us understand the present. Particular games make aspects of capitalism
easier or more difficult to see through their procedural rhetoric, or what Wark (following
Alexander Galloway’s neologistic combination of “allegory” and “algorithm”) calls their
“allegorithm.” Even so, the simplest game already contains the defining qualities of capitalism.
In Wark’s reading, Katamari Damacy becomes an updated myth of Sisyphus, and an allegory
for the capture of the analog by the digital. For instance, the game transforms the aleatory
line of the katamari into thresholds of size and time that convert it into a binary value of
Figure 16.1 Katamari Damacy.
Source: Namco 2004.
success or failure, removing the older ambiguity of Sisphysus’ task. The omnivorous tendency
of the katamari to absorb even those things that appear solid, such as the walls that demarcate
a level’s boundaries, demonstrates the reduction of qualitative difference to numerical
quantities. The katamari also operates across radically different scales, substituting a human
perspective for the microscopic and the cosmic. This summary is not an exhaustive list of
what Wark suggests we can see through Katamari Damacy, but the point is that in each case
the specific procedural argument can be translated into a statement, a fact that we now know
about late capitalism.
In an essay that is in part a response to Wark, Steven Jones also argues that Katamari Damacy
tells us something essential about games. Instead of treating collecting as a symptom of cap -
italism, Jones characterizes this mechanic as a feature of most games in which a player picks
up a weapon or a key and generates meaning through that process. In this way, collecting
in a videogame is an act that is comparable to collecting on eBay or during archival research.
Jones takes Katamari Damacy to embody a punk aesthetic in its anarchic collecting mechanic
that evacuates pre-established meaning and leaves a void that demands to be filled by player
actions. Because it has no content of its own, collecting in this game is “inherently an activity
that points outside of itself, outside of the game itself . . . because it only truly has meaning
in the context of a fanbase or other kind of community” (Jones 2008: 64). The playful path
of the ball, the qualities of the objects that are rolled together, the kinesthetic pleasure of the
joysticks—these are the elements from which players generate meaning.
For both Wark and Jones, Katamari Damacy is a privileged example because the game reflects
on its material and formal conditions. In our own approach, one which privileges the way
that mechanics generate affects, Katamari Damacy is also important because it operates as a
tour de force of collecting, exploring the various senses of the verb that are visible in more
isolated forms in games such as Pokémon or Go Fish. Unlike the real world collections that
Jones explores, the objects in Katamari Damacy are ideal in a variety of senses that alter the
feeling of collecting them. For instance, they do not degrade with time, they cannot be des -
troyed, and they are not removed from circulation when placed in another player’s collection.
Collecting is thus removed in this game from an involvement in an economy, making rare
acquisitions correspond directly to virtuosic performance in the game. Desire is indexed to
difficulty rather than rarity. Furthermore, because objects cannot be destroyed, the potential
for growth matters more than the threat of loss, a feeling made visceral whenever players
recklessly knock pieces off their katamari ball.
In Katamari Damacy, collecting is recontextualized by rules that idealize the world. The
mechanic responds with affordances of fearlessness, virtuosic performance, and yearning. In
this structure of feeling, we might recognize both the Sisyphean labor of Wark’s account and
the anarchic punk aesthetic of Jones. But there are other valences as well that can illuminate
thematic choices within the game, such as the narrative resonance with courtly love or an
alternate relation to the father that bypasses the anxiety of castration or loss. The meaning of
collecting is not unitary, nor tied to the rhetorical purposes of a particular game, but neither
is it vague or characteristic of all play. A mechanic constellates an array of feelings, a palette
that a designer or player can reliably draw upon.
The Case of “Blocking” in Smoke Stacks:
Game Design
Affects are key to game experience in general, but they play an especially central role in
learning-oriented games. Though affect as such does not figure prominently in literature about
GAME MECHANICS, DESIGN, AND AFFECTIVE PLAY
179
educational games, related discussions about emotion inform practice-based research in
digital humanities and new media studies. James Paul Gee argues that work in education has
traditionally emphasized rationality and intellectual content over emotion. However, as he
adds, emotion helps learners to integrate previous knowledge and organize long-term mem -
ory, focus attention and retrieve information, and evaluate possible actions (2008: 35). Games
that seek to promote learning, then, must be attentive to the range of possible play experiences,
including gradations of various named emotions and nonconscious intensities.
Since the 1980s, many educational games—including what Mizuko Ito calls “academic”
games such as Math Blaster and “entertainment” games such as Where in the World is Carmen
Sandiego? (2008: 89–116)—have offered interactive content delivery without a robust emo -
tional experience. Similarly, serious games with social and political objectives some times put
a greater emphasis on conveying values through game systems in a direct fashion, as Mary
Flanagan and Helen Nissenbaum have described the work of the “conscientious designer”
(2014: xii–xiii). While content and values are important in such games, emotions and
especially obscure or illegible affects can sometimes become marginal.
The analysis of the collecting mechanic that we suggested in the previous section
demonstrates the types of affects, feelings, and moods that games make available. An under -
standing of how core game mechanics generate such affects, and the meanings that follow
from them, may be even more useful for designing games that are meant to tackle specific
social issues. At the GCC Design Lab, we create both digital and board games that explore
issues of social and emotional health related to topics such as unplanned pregnancy and
bullying. In designing such games, we often experiment with the affective affordances of
mechanics through techniques of rapid prototyping and iterative design. Because our goal is
often to influence the knowledge, attitudes, or behaviors of players, an understanding of affect
becomes especially important.
To briefly demonstrate how mechanics and affects are important to serious game design,
we take up a case study of a board game that the authors created as part of the GCC Design
Lab. This game, Smoke Stacks, tackles the use of tobacco products among high school youth.
The game is one in a suite designed for the same Hexacago board, which depicts the city of
Chicago broken down into hexagons. The learning objectives for Smoke Stacks include helping
players understand marketing approaches deployed by the tobacco industry and their impact
on smoking behaviors. By helping youth understand the history of tobacco legislation as well
as the health effects of smoking, the game attempts to curb interest in tobacco products. In
the game, four to six players take the role of tobacco companies who try to accumulate as
many customers as possible. In each round, players formulate corporate strategies by bidding
on cards that provide them with products (e.g., “cigarettes” or “chewing tobacco”), marketing
approaches (e.g., making customers feel “independent” or “sexy”), and advertising media
(e.g., “television” or “billboards”). These cards allow each player to target particular customers
in certain zones on the board, while every customer increases a player’s profit margin.
In creating Smoke Stacks, we did not privilege a uniform play experience but rather attended
to the broad range of affects that mechanics might generate. The three primary mechanics
in this game are collecting (picking up customers from particular urban zones), wagering (on
corporate strategy cards), and blocking (keeping other players from collecting the cards they
want). In our iterative design process, we were attentive, for example, to the affordances of
blocking. In our research on blocking in games, we analyzed sports games, popular board
games such as Settlers of Catan, and tower defense videogames. Across these genres, we char -
acterized blocking as a mechanic that arises through the player’s investment in a project that
is under threat. In many of these games, players often go to wasteful lengths to negate a threat
PATRICK JAGODA AND PETER MCDONALD
180
and regain a sense of safety, and they give up only when the situation feels utterly futile. To
block, the player must understand the motives of an opponent and the details of the game
system. Such understanding infuses minute actions with a sense of urgency, while sometimes
generating feelings of pettiness, aggression, and desire for revenge.
In the Smoke Stacks design, mechanics foreground specific feelings that attend political,
economic, and social systems often imagined at scales beyond individual human experience.
In other words, mechanics make the abstraction of systems tangible. In the context of tobacco
use, blocking gives players an opportunity to work through the affective dimensions of how
certain policies may lead to a competitive race to the bottom. Players can block other players
from either collecting desired cards or accumulating the maximum number of customers.
The experience of blocking another player animates ways in which inequality is built into
policies, even when the rationality of large-scale systems such as “the market” is meant to
overshadow human motivations and feelings.
The tobacco system that Smoke Stacks models allows a player to experiment with elements
of corporate strategy, profit motives, addictive consequences, and histories of government
legislation. The game makes this affective field, which includes both systemic and historical
elements, accessible and palpable through mechanics. Given the complexity of this dynamic
system, the process of experience design required frequent playtesting with ongoing player
feedback and designer self-reflection over several months. An iterative design method maxi -
mized the affordances of the core mechanics. Thus, rather than seeking uniform reception,
the design process explored the possible experiences that each version of the game made
possible.
Conclusion
This chapter offers only a sketch of a form of game analysis and experience design that priv -
ileges mechanics as a way to understand the affective dimensions of broader systems. Although
we focused on a few case studies, experience design is important to a wide array of methods
across games and genres. Such methods might include not only close reading but also the
study of online archives of player responses to games, focus groups and interviews with players,
and practice-based research that includes creating and play testing games to better understand
their affordances. The field of game studies, and perhaps especially the growing area of serious
game analysis and design, will benefit from a fuller understanding of the relationship between
mechanics and affects.
Further Reading
Bogost, I. (2006) Unit Operations: An Approach to Videogame Criticism, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Flanagan, M. (2009) Critical Play: Radical Game Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
Isbister, K. (2016) How Games Move Us: Emotion by Design, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Juul, J. (2005) Half-Real: Video Games Between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Miller, K. (2012) Playing Along: Digital Games, YouTube, and Virtual Performance, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wardrip-Fruin, N. (2009) Expressive Processing: Digital Fictions, Computer Games, and Software Studies, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
References
Bogost, I. (2007) Persuasive Games: The Expressive Power of Videogames, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deleuze, G. (1983) Nietzsche and Philosophy, New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Flanagan, M. and H. Nissenbaum (2014) Values at Play in Digital Games, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
GAME MECHANICS, DESIGN, AND AFFECTIVE PLAY
181
Galloway, A. (2006) Gaming: Essays on Algorithmic Culture, Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press.
Gee, J. P. (2008) “Learning and Games,” in K. S. Tekinbas¸ (ed.) The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games,
and Learning, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ito, M. (2008) “Education vs. Entertainment: A Cultural History of Children’s Software,” in K. S. Tekinbas¸ (ed.)
The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games, and Learning, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jones, S. E. (2008) The Meaning of Videogames, New York, NY: Routledge.
Murray, J. (1997) Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace, New York, NY: The Free Press.
Shouse, E. (2005) “Feeling, Emotion, Affect,” M/C Journal 8.6.
Sicart, M. (2011) “Against Procedurality,” Game Studies 11.3.
Sicart, M. (2014) Play Matters, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Squire, K. (2008) “Open-Ended Video Games: A Model for Developing Learning for the Interactive Age,” in
K. S. Tekinbas¸ (ed.) The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games, and Learning, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tekinbas¸, K. S. (2007) “Gaming Literacies: A Game Design Study in Action,” Journal of Educational Multimedia and
Hypermedia 16.3.
Tekinbas¸, K. S. and E. Zimmerman (2003) Rules of Play: Game Design Fundamentals Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Voorhees, G. (2013) “Criticism and Control: Gameplay in the Space of Possibility,” in M. Wysocki (ed.) Ctrl-AltPlay: Essays on Control in Video Gaming, Jefferson, NC: McFarland.
Wark, M. (2007) Gamer Theory, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
PATRICK JAGODA AND PETER MCDONALD
182